Minna no Nihongo I — Grammar by Lesson
Grammar Explanation (Section IV) of Lessons 1–25, extracted from "Minna no Nihongo I – Translation & Grammatical Notes" (3A Corporation).
Contents: Part 1 – Grammar Explanations, Lessons 1–25  |  Part 2 – Grammar Questions
PART 1 — GRAMMAR BY LESSON
Lesson 1
1. N₁は N₂です
1) Particle は
The particle は indicates that the word before it is the topic of the sentence. You select a noun you want to talk about, add は to show that it is the topic and give a statement about the topic.
NOTE: The particle は is read わ.
2) です
Nouns used with です work as predicates.
です indicates judgement or assertion.
です also conveys that the speaker is being polite towards the listener.
です inflects when the sentence is negative (see 2. below) or in the past tense (see Lesson 12).
2. N₁は N₂じゃ ありません
じゃ ありません is the negative form of です. It is the form used in daily conversation. For a formal speech or writing, では ありません is used instead.
NOTE: は in では is read わ.
3. S か
1) Particle か
The particle か is used to express the speaker's doubt, question, uncertainty, etc. A question is formed by simply adding か to the end of the sentence. A question ends with a rising intonation.
2) Questions asking whether a statement is correct or not
As mentioned above, a sentence becomes a question when か is added to the end. The word order does not change. The question thus made asks whether a statement is correct or not. Depending on whether you agree with the statement or not, your answer to such a question begins with はい or いいえ.
3) Questions with interrogatives
An interrogative replaces the part of the sentence that covers what you want to ask about. The word order does not change, and か is added at the end.
4. N も
も is added after a topic instead of は when the statement about the topic is the same as the previous topic.
5. N₁の N₂
の is used to connect two nouns. N₁ modifies N₂. In Lesson 1, N₁ is an organization or some kind of group to which N₂ belongs.
6. ～さん
さん is added to the name of the listener or a third person to show the speaker's respect to the person. It should never be used with the speaker's own name.
When referring directly to the listener, the word あなた (you) is not commonly used if you know the listener's name. The listener's family name followed by さん is usually used.
Lesson 2
1. これ／それ／あれ
これ, それ and あれ are demonstratives.
They work as nouns. これ refers to a thing near the speaker. それ refers to a thing near the listener. あれ refers to a thing far from the speaker and the listener.
2. この N／その N／あの N
この, その and あの modify nouns. "この N" refers to a thing or a person near the speaker. "その N" refers to a thing or a person near the listener. "あの N" refers to a thing or a person far from both the speaker and the listener.
Figure: (Illustration) これ / この かばん — それ / その かばん — あれ / あの かばん
3. そうです／そうじゃ ありません
In the case of a noun sentence, the word そう is often used to answer a question requiring an affirmative or negative answer. はい、そうです is the affirmative answer and いいえ、そうじゃ ありません is the negative answer.
The verb ちがいます (lit. to differ) can be used to mean そうじゃ ありません.
4. S₁か、S₂か
This is a question asking the listener to choose between alternatives, S₁ and S₂, for the answer. As an answer to this type of question, the chosen sentence is stated. Neither はい nor いいえ is used.
5. N₁の N₂
You learned in Lesson 1 that の is used to connect two nouns when N₁ modifies N₂. In Lesson 2 you learn two other uses of this の.
1) N₁ explains what N₂ is about.
2) N₁ explains who owns N₂.
N₂ is sometimes omitted when it is obvious. When N₂ means a person, however, you cannot omit it.
6. そうですか
This expression is used when the speaker receives new information and shows that he or she understands it.
Lesson 3
1. ここ／そこ／あそこ／こちら／そちら／あちら
The demonstratives これ, それ and あれ that are discussed in Lesson 2 refer to a thing, while ここ, そこ and あそこ refer to a place. ここ is the place where the speaker is, そこ is the place where the listener is, and あそこ is the place far from both the speaker and the listener.
こちら, そちら and あちら are demonstrative words referring to direction. こちら, そちら and あちら are also used to refer to location, in which case, they are politer than ここ, そこ and あそこ.
NOTE: When the speaker regards the listener as sharing his/her territory, the place where they both are is designated by the word ここ. Under this situation, そこ designates the place a little distant from the speaker and listener, and あそこ designates an even more distant location.
Figure: (Illustrations) あそこ / ここ / そこ ; あそこ / そこ / ここ
2. N₁は N₂(place)です
Using this sentence pattern, you can explain where a place, a thing or a person is.
3. どこ／どちら
どこ means "where," and どちら means "which direction." どちら can also mean "where," in which case it's politer than どこ.
どこ or どちら is also used to ask the name of a country, company, school or any place or organization a person belongs to. You cannot use なん (what). どちら is politer than どこ.
4. N₁の N₂
When N₁ is the name of a country and N₂ is a product, it means that N₂ is made in that country. When N₁ is the name of a company and N₂ is a product, it means that N₂ is made by that company. In this structure, どこ is used to ask where or by whom N₂ is made.
5. The こ／そ／あ／ど system of demonstrative words
6. お国
The prefix お is added to a word concerning the listener or a third person in order to express the speaker's respect to the person.
Lesson 4
1. 今 －時－分です
To express time, the counter suffixes 時 (o'clock) and 分 (minutes) are used. The numbers are put before them. 分 is read ふん after 2, 5, 7 or 9 and ぷん after 1, 3, 4, 6, 8 or 10. 1, 6, 8 and 10 are read いっ, ろっ, はっ and じゅっ (じっ) before ぷん. (See Appendices II.)
The interrogative なん is used with a counter suffix to ask questions concerning number or amounts. Therefore, the word なんじ (or sometimes なんぷん) is used to ask the time.
NOTE: は marks the topic of a sentence, which you learned in Lesson 1. A geographical location can also be used as the topic as can be seen in ②.
2. Vます
1) A verb with ます works as a predicate.
2) ます makes a sentence polite.
3. Vます／Vません／Vました／Vませんでした
1) ます is used when a sentence expresses a habitual thing or a truth. It is also used when a sentence expresses a thing that will occur in the future. The negative form and the forms in the past tense are shown in the table below.
2) Question forms of verb sentences are made in the same way as those of noun sentences; i.e., the word order remains the same and か is added to the end of the sentence.
In answering such questions, the verbs in the questions are repeated. そうです or そうじゃ ありません (see Lesson 2) cannot be used.
4. N(time)に V
When a verb denotes a momentary action or movement, the time when it occurs is marked with the particle に. に is added when the noun before it uses a numeral. It can also be added to the days of the week, though it is not essential. When the noun does not use a numeral, に is not added.
5. N₁から N₂まで
1) から indicates the starting time or place, and まで indicates the finishing time or place.
2) から and まで are not always used together.
3) ～から, ～まで or ～から～まで is sometimes used with です added directly after either.
6. N₁と N₂
The particle と connects two nouns in coordinate relation.
7. Sね
ね is attached to the end of a sentence to add feeling to what the speaker says. It shows the speaker's sympathy or the speaker's expectation that the listener will agree. In the latter usage, it is often used to confirm something.
Lesson 5
1. N(place)へ 行きます／来ます／帰ります
When a verb indicates movement to a certain place, the particle へ is put after the place noun to show the direction of the move.
NOTE: The particle へ is read え.
2. どこ[へ]も 行きません／行きませんでした
When an interrogative takes the particle も and the verb following it is negative, all that is represented by the interrogative is denied.
3. N(vehicle)で 行きます／来ます／帰ります
The particle で indicates a means or a method. When verbs denoting movement (いきます, きます, かえります, etc.) are used with で, で indicates a means of transportation. The noun preceding で is a vehicle in this case.
When you walk somewhere, you use the expression あるいて. In this case, で is not used.
4. N(person/animal)と V
When you do something with a person (or an animal), the person (or the animal) is marked with the particle と.
If you do something alone, the expression ひとりで is used. In this case, と is not used.
5. いつ
To ask about time, the interrogatives using なん such as なんじ, なんようび and なんがつなんにち are used. Other than these, the interrogative いつ (when) is also used to ask when something will happen/happened. いつ does not take the particle に.
6. Sよ
よ is placed at the end of a sentence. It is used to emphasize information which the listener does not know, or to show that you are giving your judgement or views assertively.
Lesson 6
1. N を V(transitive)
を is used to indicate the direct object of a transitive verb.
NOTE: を and お are pronounced the same. The former is used only in writing the particle.
2. N を します
The words used as the objects of the verb します cover a fairly wide range. します means that the action denoted by the noun is performed. Some examples are shown below.
1) to "play" sports or games
2) to "hold" gatherings
3) to "do" something
3. 何を しますか
This is a question to ask what someone does.
NOTE: You can make a word expressing time the topic by adding は.
4. なん and なに
Both なん and なに mean "what."
1) なん is used in the following cases.
(1) When it precedes a word whose first mora is either in the た, だ or な-row.
(2) When it is followed by a counter suffix or the like.
2) なに is used in all other cases.
5. N(place)で V
When added after a noun denoting a place, で indicates the place where an action occurs.
6. Vませんか
When you want to invite someone to do something, this expression is used.
7. Vましょう
This expression is used when a speaker is positively inviting the listener to do something with the speaker. It is also used when responding positively to an invitation.
NOTE: An invitation using Vませんか shows more consideration to the listener's will than that using Vましょう.
8. お～
You learned in Lesson 3 that the prefix お is attached to words regarding the listener or the person being referred to to show respect (e.g., [お]くに country).
お is also attached to various other words when the speaker is speaking politely (e.g., [お]さけ alcohol, [お]はなみ cherry-blossom viewing).
There are some words that are usually used with お without meaning respect or politeness (e.g., おちゃ tea, おかね money).
Lesson 7
1. N(tool/means)で V
The particle で indicates a method or a mean used for an action.
2. "Word/Sentence"は ～語で 何ですか
This question is used to ask how to say a word or a sentence in other languages.
3. N(person)に あげます, etc.
Verbs like あげます, かします, おしえます, etc., need persons to whom you give, lend, teach, etc. The persons are marked with に.
NOTE: With verbs like おくります, でんわを かけます, etc., place nouns can be used instead of N(person). In this case, the particle へ is sometimes used instead of に.
4. N(person)に もらいます, etc.
Verbs like もらいます, かります and ならいます express actions from the receiving side. The persons from whom you receive those actions are marked with に.
から is sometimes used instead of に in this sentence pattern. When you receive something from an organization like a school or a company, only から is used.
5. もう Vました
もう means "already" and is used with Vました. In this case, Vました means that the action has been finished.
The answer to the question もう Vましたか is はい、もう Vました or いいえ、まだです。
In giving a negative answer to this type of question, you should not use Vませんでした, as this simply means you did not do the specified task rather than you have not done it yet.
Lesson 8
1. Adjectives
Adjectives are used as 1) predicates and 2) noun modifiers. They inflect and are divided into two groups, い-adjectives and な-adjectives, according to the inflection.
2. Nは な-adj[な]です ／ Nは い-adj(～い)です
1) です at the end of an adjective sentence shows the speaker's polite attitude toward the listener. An い-adjective with い at the end comes before です, whereas a な-adjective without [な] comes before です.
です is used when a sentence is non-past and affirmative.
2) な-adj[な]じゃ ありません
The negative form of な-adj[な]です is な-adj[な]じゃ ありません. (な-adj[な]では ありません)
3) い-adj(～い)です → ～くないです
To make the negative form of an い-adjective, い at the end of the い-adjective is altered to くない.
The negative for いいです is よくないです.
4) Questions using adjective sentences are made in the same way as those using noun or verb sentences. In answering a question, you repeat the adjective used in the question. そうです or そうじゃ ありません cannot be used.
3. な-adjな N ／ い-adj(～い) N
An adjective is put before a noun to modify it. A な-adjective needs な before a noun.
4. とても／あまり
とても and あまり are adverbs of degree. Both come before the adjectives they are modifying.
とても is used in affirmative sentences, and means "very." あまり is used in negative sentences, and a negative form mean "not very."
5. Nは どうですか
This question is used to ask an impression or an opinion about a thing, place or person, etc., that the listener has experienced, visited or met.
6. N₁は どんな N₂ですか
When the speaker wants the listener to describe or explain N₁, this question pattern is used. N₂ denotes the category N₁ belongs to. The interrogative どんな is always followed by a noun.
7. S₁が、S₂
が is a conjunctive particle, meaning "but." It is used to link sentences.
8. どれ
This interrogative is used to ask the listener to choose or designate one from more than two things concretely shown or named.
Lesson 9
1. Nが あります／わかります ／ Nが 好きです／嫌いです／上手です／下手です
The object of a transitive verb is marked with を. However, objects of the verbs あります and わかります are marked with が.
Such adjectives as すきです, きらいです, じょうずです and へたです require objects, and these are marked with が, too. The verbs and adjectives whose objects are marked with が are those kinds that describe preference, ability, possession and the like.
2. どんな N
Other than the usage you learned in Lesson 8, どんな is also used to ask the listener to name one from a group which the noun after どんな denotes.
3. よく／だいたい／たくさん／少し／あまり／全然
These adverbs are put before verbs when they modify them. The following is a summary of their usage.
NOTE: すこし and ぜんぜん can also modify adjectives.
4. S₁から、S₂
から connects two sentences together to denote a causal relationship. S₁ is the reason for S₂.
You can also state S₂ first and add the reason after it.
5. どうして
The interrogative どうして is used to ask a reason. The answer needs から at the end.
The question どうしてですか is also used to ask the reason for what the other person has said.
Lesson 10
1. Nが あります／います
This sentence pattern is used to indicate the existence or presence of a thing(s) or person(s). The thing(s) or person(s) in such a sentence is treated as the subject and marked with the particle が.
1) あります is used when what is present is inanimate or does not move by itself. Things, plants and places belong in this category.
2) When what is present is animate and moves by itself, います is used. People and animals belong in this category.
2. N₁(place)に N₂が あります／います
1) The place where N₂ is present is indicated by the particle に.
2) You can ask what or who is present at/in the place by using this pattern. The interrogative なに is used for things and だれ is used for persons.
3. N₁は N₂(place)に あります／います
1) In this sentence pattern, the speaker picks up N₁ as the topic, and explains where it is. The topic should be something or someone that both the speaker and the listener know about. The particle attached to N₁ is not が, which marks the subject, but は, which marks the topic.
2) When you ask where N₁ is, this sentence pattern is used.
NOTE: です is sometimes used to replace a verb predicate when the predicate is obvious. The sentence N₁は N₂(place)に あります／います can be replaced by the sentence N₁は N₂(place)です, which you learned in Lesson 3.
4. N₁(thing/person/place)の N₂(position)
うえ, した, まえ, うしろ, みぎ, ひだり, なか, そと, となり, ちかく and あいだ are nouns denoting position.
NOTE: As these are place nouns, not only に but also particles like で can come after them.
5. N₁や N₂
Nouns are connected in coordinate relation by the particle や. While と enumerates all the items, や shows a few representative items. Sometimes など is put after the last noun to explicitly express that there are also some other things of the kind.
6. Word(s)ですか
The particle か has the function to confirm. The speaker picks up a word or words he/she wants to confirm and confirms it (them) using this pattern.
7. チリソースは ありませんか
The expression チリソースは ありませんか is found in the conversation of this lesson. By using the negative form ありませんか instead of ありますか, you can be indirect and polite, showing that you are prepared for a negative answer.
Lesson 11
1. Saying numbers
1) ひとつ, ふたつ……とお
These words are used to count things up to ten. Eleven and higher are counted by using the numbers themselves.
2) Counter Suffixes
When counting some sorts of things or expressing the quantity of things, counter suffixes are attached after the numbers.
Details and other counter suffixes are listed in the appendices.
3) Usage
Quantifiers (numbers with counter suffixes) are usually put before the verbs they modify. However, this is not always the case with length of time.
4) Interrogatives
(1) いくつ is used to ask how many about things which are counted as ひとつ, ふたつ, ……。
(2) なん is used with a counter suffix to ask how many.
(3) どのくらい is used to ask the length of time something takes. You can use various units of time in the answer.
5) ぐらい
ぐらい is added after quantifiers to mean "about."
2. Quantifier(period)に －回 V
With this expression you can say how often you do something.
3. Quantifierだけ／Nだけ
だけ means "only." It is added after quantifiers or nouns to express that there is no more or nothing (no one) else.
Lesson 12
1. Past tense of noun sentences and な-adjective sentences
2. Past tense of い-adjective sentences
3. N₁は N₂より adjectiveです
This sentence pattern describes the quality and/or state of N₁ in comparison with N₂.
4. N₁と N₂と どちらが adjectiveですか …N₁／N₂の ほうが adjectiveです
The question asks the listener to choose between two items (N₁ and N₂). The interrogative used is always どちら if the comparison is made between two items.
5. N₁[の 中]で 何／どこ／だれ／いつ が いちばん adjectiveですか …N₂が いちばん adjectiveです
This question pattern is used to ask the listener to choose something that is the most "adjective." The choice is made from the group or category denoted by N₁. The interrogative used is decided by the kind of category from which the choice is made.
NOTE: When the subject is an interrogative, the particle が is used. (See Lesson 10, なにが ありますか／だれが いますか.)
When the subject of an adjective sentence is questioned, が is attached to the interrogative in the same way.
Lesson 13
1. Nが 欲しいです
This sentence pattern is used to express the speaker's desire to possess or have an object. It can also be used to ask what the listener wants. The object is marked with the particle が. ほしい is an い-adjective.
2. Vます-form たいです
1) Verb ます-form
The form of a verb when it is used with ます is called the ます-form. In the word かいます, かい is the ます-form.
2) Vます-form たいです
This expresses the speaker's desire to do something. It is also used to ask what the listener wants to do. In this expression, as is seen in ⑤ below, the particle が can replace the particle を. The other particles cannot be replaced by が. Vます-form たい inflects as an い-adjective.
NOTE 1: ほしいです or ～たいです cannot be used to describe the third person's desire.
NOTE 2: You can neither use ほしいですか nor Vます-form たいですか when you offer something or invite someone to do something. For example, when you offer a cup of coffee (or invite the listener to have a cup of coffee), you should not say, コーヒーが ほしいですか, nor should you say コーヒーを のみたいですか. Expressions such as コーヒーは いかがですか or コーヒーを のみませんか should be used.
3. N(place)へ Vます-form／N に 行きます／来ます／帰ります
The purpose for いきます, きます or かえります is expressed using this pattern. The purpose is marked with the particle に. A noun used before に is of the kind denoting an action.
NOTE: You can also use nouns denoting events such as festivals and concerts before に. In this case, the speaker's purpose is to see or enjoy the event.
4. Nに V／Nを V
The particle に marks the goal when used with verbs like はいります, のります (get on; see Lesson 16), etc. The particle を marks the starting point or place when used with verbs like でます, おります (get off; see Lesson 16), etc.
5. どこか／何か
どこか means anywhere or somewhere. なにか means anything or something. The particles へ and を can be omitted.
6. ご注文
ご is a prefix added to some words to express respect.
Lesson 14
1. Verb conjugation
Verbs in Japanese change their forms, i.e., they conjugate, and they are divided into three groups according to the type of conjugation. Depending on the following phrases, you can make sentences with various meanings.
2. Verb groups
1) Group I verbs
In the verbs of this group, the last sound of the ます-form is that of the い-line. (See Main Textbook, p. 2, "かなと拍.")
2) Group II verbs
In most of the verbs of this group, the last sound of the ます-form is that of the え-line, but in some verbs the last sound of the ます-form is that of the い-line.
3) Group III verbs
Verbs of this group include します and "noun denoting an action + します" as well as きます.
3. Verb て-form
The verb form which ends with て or で is called the て-form. How to make the て-form of a verb depends on which group the verb belongs to as explained below. (See Main Textbook, Lesson 14, p. 116, 練習A 1.)
1) Group I: Depending on the last sound of the ます-form, the て-form of the verbs of this group is made as shown in the form table. (See Main Textbook, Lesson 14, 練習A 1.) Note that the て-form of the verb いきます, いって, is an exception.
2) Group II: Attach て to the ます-form.
3) Group III: Attach て to the ます-form.
4. Vて-form ください
This sentence pattern is used to ask, instruct or encourage the listener to do something. Naturally, if the listener is one's superior, this expression cannot be used for giving instructions to him/her. The sentences shown below are examples of asking, instructing and encouraging, respectively.
When it is used to ask the listener to do something, すみませんが is often added before Vて-form ください as in ①. This expression is politer than only saying Vて-form ください.
5. Vて-form います
be V-ing
This sentence pattern indicates that a certain action or motion is in progress.
6. Vます-form ましょうか
Shall I...?
This expression is used when the speaker is offering to do something for the listener.
In the above example conversations, B demonstrates how to politely ask or instruct someone to do something (⑥), to accept an offer with gratitude (⑦) and to decline an offer politely (⑧).
7. S₁が、S₂
..., but...
You learned the conjunctive particle が in Lesson 8. In expressions such as しつれいですが or すみませんが, which are used as introductory remarks when speaking to someone, が, losing its original meaning, is used to connect two sentences lightly.
8. Nが V
When describing a natural phenomenon, the subject is indicated by が.
Lesson 15
1. Vて-form も いいです
You may do...
This expression is used to grant permission.
To ask for permission, the question form of this sentence is used.
How to answer such a question using the same sentence pattern is as follows. Note that an euphemistic answer is given when permission is not granted.
2. Vて-form は いけません
You must not do...
This sentence pattern is used to express prohibition.
When you strongly wish to refuse permission to questions using the expression Vて-form も いいですか, you answer いいえ、いけません, omitting Vて-form は. This expression cannot be used by an inferior to a superior.
3. Vて-form います
In addition to the usage of Vて-form います you learned in Lesson 14, it is also used in describing a certain continuing state which resulted from a certain action in the past.
もって います means "be holding" and "possess" as well.
4. Vて-form います
Vて-form います is also used in describing a habitual action; that is, when the same action is repeatedly performed over a period of time.
Therefore, one's occupation can be expressed by this sentence pattern, like in ⑫ and ⑬. So if the question おしごとは なんですか is asked, this sentence pattern can be used to answer it.
5. 知りません
The negative form of しって います is しりません.
Lesson 16
1. Vて-form、[Vて-form]、～
To connect verb sentences, the て-form is used. When two or more actions take place in succession, the actions are mentioned in the order of occurrence by using the て-form. The tense of the sentence is determined by the tense form of the last verb in the sentence.
2. い-adj(～い) → ～くて、～
When joining an い-adjective sentence to another sentence, take away the い from the い-adjective and attach くて.
3. N／な-adj[な] で、～
When joining noun sentences or な-adjective sentences, です is changed to で.
NOTE 1: The above structures can be used not only for connecting sentences relating to the same topic but also sentences with different topics.
NOTE 2: This method cannot connect sentences of contradictory notion. In that case, が is used (see Lesson 8, 7).
4. V₁て-form から、V₂
This sentence pattern indicates that upon completion of the action denoted by V₁, the action of V₂ is to be conducted. The tense of the sentence is determined by the tense form of the last verb in the sentence.
NOTE: The subject of a subordinate clause is indicated by が, as shown in the example sentence ⑩.
5. N₁は N₂が adjective
This sentence pattern is used to describe an attribute of a thing or a person. The topic of the sentence is denoted by は. N₁ is the topic of the sentence. N₂ is the subject of the adjective's description.
6. どうやって
どうやって is used to ask the way or the method of doing something. To answer such a question, the pattern learned in 1. is used.
7. どの N
You learned in Lesson 2 that この, その and あの modify nouns. The interrogative word used in this system is どの. どの is used to ask the listener to define one among more than two which are concretely presented.
Lesson 17
1. Verb ない-form
The verb form used with ない is called the ない-form; that is to say, かか of かかない is the ない-form of かきます (write). How to make the ない-form is given below (see Main Textbook, Lesson 17, p. 140, 練習A 1).
1) Group I
In the verbs of this group the last sound of the ます-form is always the sound in the い-line. So, replace it with the sound of the あ-line to make a ない-form. The exceptions to this rule are such verbs as かいます, あいます, etc. (わ is the last sound of the ない-form in these verbs instead of あ.) (See Main Textbook, p. 2, "かなと拍.")
2) Group II
The ない-form of verbs of this group is just the same as the ます-form.
3) Group III
The ない-form of します is the same as the ます-form. きます becomes こ(ない).
2. Vない-form ないでください
Please don't...
This expression is used to ask or instruct someone not to do something.
3. Vない-form なければ なりません
must...
This expression means something has to be done regardless of the will of the actor. Note that this doesn't have a negative meaning.
4. Vない-form なくても いいです
need not ...
This sentence pattern indicates that the action described by the verb does not have to be done.
5. N(object)は
You learned in Lesson 6 that the particle を is attached to the direct object of verbs. Here you learn that the object is made a topic by replacing を with は.
6. N(time)までに V
The point in time indicated by までに is the time limit by which an action is to be done.
NOTE: Make sure you do not confuse までに with the particle まで.
Lesson 18
1. Verb dictionary form
This form is the basic form of a verb. Verbs are given in this form in the dictionary, hence the name. How to make the dictionary form is given below. (See Main Textbook, Lesson 18, p. 148, 練習A 1.)
1) Group I: In the verbs of this group the last sound of the ます-form is always in the い-line. Replace it with the sound in the う-line to make the dictionary form. (See Main Textbook, p. 2, "かなと拍.")
2) Group II: Attach る to the ます-form.
3) Group III: します becomes する and きます becomes くる.
2. N／Vdictionary form こと が できます
can...
できます is the verb which expresses ability or possibility. A noun and Vdictionary form こと before が indicates the content of ability or possibility.
1) Noun
Nouns placed before が are mostly nouns which express actions such as driving a car, shopping, skiing, dancing, etc. Nouns such as にほんご, which is associated with the action はなす, or ピアノ, which is associated with the action ひく, can also be used here.
2) Verb
When a verb is used to describe ability or possibility, こと should be attached to the dictionary form of the verb to make it a nominalized phrase and then が できます is put after that.
3. わたしの 趣味は N／Vdictionary form こと です
My hobby is...
As shown in ⑤ and ⑥ below, Vdictionary form こと can express the content of hobbies more concretely than the noun alone can do.
4. V₁dictionary form／Nの／Quantifier(period) まえに、V₂
..., before...
1) Verb
This sentence pattern indicates that the action of V₂ occurs before the action of V₁ takes place. Even when the tense of V₂ is in the past tense or the future tense, V₁ is always in the dictionary form.
2) Noun
When まえに comes after a noun, the particle の is put between the noun and まえに. Nouns before まえに are nouns which express actions or nouns which imply actions.
3) Quantifier(period)
When まえに comes after a quantifier (period), the particle の is not necessary.
5. なかなか
When なかなか is accompanied by a negative expression, it means "not easily" or "not as expected."
NOTE: は of にほんでは in ⑪ is attached to で to emphasize the location or area under discussion.
6. ぜひ
ぜひ is used with expressions of hope and request such as ほしいです, Vます-form たいです and Vて-form ください and emphasizes the meaning of the expressions.
Lesson 19
1. Verb た-form
In this lesson you learn the た-form. How to make the た-form is shown below. (See Main Textbook, Lesson 19, p. 156, 練習A 1.)
The た-form is made by changing て and で of the て-form into た and だ respectively.
2. Vた-form ことが あります
have the experience of V-ing
This sentence pattern is used to describe what one has experienced in the past. This is basically the same sentence as わたしは Nが あります which you learned in Lesson 9. The content of one's experience is expressed by the nominalized phrase Vた-form こと.
Note that it is, therefore, different from a sentence which merely states the fact that one did something at a certain time in the past.
3. Vた-form り、Vた-form り します
V...and V..., and so on
You learned an expression for referring to a few things and persons among many (～や ～[など]) in Lesson 10. The sentences learned here are used in referring to some actions among many other actions. The tense of this sentence pattern is shown at the end of the sentence.
NOTE: Make sure that you don't confuse the meaning of this sentence pattern with that of the て-form sentence (⑤) which you learned in Lesson 16.
In ⑤ it is clear that seeing a movie took place after playing tennis. In ④ there is no time relation between the two activities. These activities are mentioned as example activities among the activities done on Sunday to imply that one did other activities besides them. And it is not natural that actions usually done by everybody every day such as getting up in the morning, taking meals, going to bed at night, etc., are mentioned.
4. い-adj(～い)→～く ／ な-adj[な]→に ／ N に なります
become...
なります means "become" and indicates changes in a state or condition.
5. そうですね
そうですね is used when you agree or sympathize with what your partner in conversation said. そうですか with a falling intonation is a similar expression to this (see Lesson 2, 6). そうですか(↘) is, however, an expression of your conviction or exclamation after getting information which was unknown to you, while そうですね is used to express your agreement or sympathy with your partner in conversation when he/she refers to something you agree with or already know.
Lesson 20
1. Polite style and plain style
Japanese language has two styles of speech: polite style and plain style.
The predicates which are used in polite style sentences and accompanied by either です or ます are called the polite form, while the predicates used in plain style sentences are called the plain form. (See Main Textbook, Lesson 20, p. 166, 練習A 1)
2. Proper use of the polite style or the plain style
1) The polite style can be used at anytime in any place and to anybody. Therefore, the polite style is used most commonly in daily conversation between adults who are not close friends. It is used when talking to a person one has met for the first time, to one's superiors, or even to persons in a similar age group to whom one is not very close. The polite style may be chosen when one talks to a person who is younger or lower in rank yet not so close. The plain style is used when talking to one's close friends, colleagues and family members.
Note that you need to be careful about how much politeness is needed, basing this on the age of your conversation partner and your type of relationship. If the plain style is used inappropriately, you could sound rough and impolite, so when you cannot tell the situation it is safer to use the polite style.
2) The plain style is commonly used in written work. Newspapers, books, theses and diaries are all written in the plain style. Most letters are written in the polite style.
3. Conversation in the plain style
1) Questions in the plain style generally omit the particle か, which denotes a question, and end with a rising intonation, such as のむ(↗).
2) In noun and な-adjective questions, だ, which is the plain form of です, is omitted. In an answer in the affirmative, ending the sentence with だ could sound too rough. You can either omit だ or add some sentence final particle to soften the tone of the sentence. Women seldom use だ.
3) In the plain style, certain particles are often omitted if the meaning of the sentence is evident from the context.
で, に, から, まで, と, etc., however, are not omitted because the meaning of the sentence may not be clear without them.
4) In the plain style, い of Vて-form いる is also often dropped.
5) けど
けど has the same function as が, which is used to connect two sentences (see Lesson 8, 7 and Lesson 14, 7). It is often used in conversations.
Lesson 21
1. plain formと 思います
I think that...
The ideas or information expressed with おもいます are indicated by the particle と.
1) When expressing conjecture
When the content of conjecture is negative in nature, make the sentence before と negative.
2) When expressing one's opinion
The expression ～について どう おもいますか is used to ask someone's opinion on something by using おもいます. と is not necessary after どう.
Agreement or disagreement with other people's opinions can be expressed as follows.
2. "S"／plain form と 言います
say...
The content expressed with いいます is indicated by the particle と.
1) When quoting directly what someone says or said, repeat exactly what they say as in the following structure.
2) When quoting indirectly what someone says or said, the plain form is used before と. The tense of the quoted sentence is not affected by the tense of the main sentence.
3. V／い-adj／な-adj plain form／N ～だ でしょう？
When the speaker expects that the listener has some knowledge on the topic being discussed and that the listener will agree with the speaker's view, でしょう is said with a rising intonation to confirm the listener's agreement.
4. N₁(place)で N₂が あります
When N₂ expresses such events as a party, concert, festival, incident, disaster and so on, あります means "to take place" or "to be held."
5. N(occasion)で
When some action takes place on a certain occasion, that occasion is followed by で.
6. Nでも V
でも is used to give an example out of things of the same kind (drinks in the case of ⑭) when one encourages or advises someone to do something or when one makes a suggestion.
7. Vない-form ないと……
This expression is made by omitting いけません from Vない-form ないと いけません. Vない-form ないと いけません is similar to Vない-form なければ なりません which you learned in Lesson 17.
Lesson 22
1. Noun modification
You learned how to modify nouns in Lesson 2 and Lesson 8.
In Japanese, whatever modifies a word, whether it's a word or a sentence, it always comes before the word to be modified. Here you learn another way to modify nouns.
2. Noun modification by sentences
1) The predicate of the sentence which modifies a noun is in the plain form.
In the case of な-adjective sentences, ～だ becomes ～な. In the case of noun sentences ～だ becomes ～の.
2) Nouns, which are various elements of the sentence, are picked out of it and can be modified by it.
When the nouns underlined in ②, ③ and ④ are modified, the particles を, で, and に attached to them respectively are unnecessary.
3) The noun modified by a sentence ("the house where Mr. Miller lived" in the example sentences below) can be used in various parts of a sentence.
3. Nが
When a sentence modifies a noun, the subject in the sentence is indicated by が.
4. Vdictionary form 時間／約束／用事
When expressing the time for doing some activity, put the dictionary form of the action before じかん.
You can also say the content of the arrangement (appointment), etc., by putting the dictionary form of that action before やくそく, etc.
Lesson 23
1. Vdictionary form／Vない-form／い-adj(～い)／な-adjな／Nの とき、～
When..., ...
とき connects two sentences and expresses the time when the state or action described in the main sentence exists or occurs. As shown in the table above, the forms of verbs, い-adjectives, な-adjectives and nouns connected to とき are the same as the forms when modifying nouns.
The tense of adjective sentences and noun sentences which modify とき is not affected by the tense of the main sentence (see ⑥ and ⑦).
2. Vdictionary form／Vた-form とき、～
When the dictionary form of the predicate is put before とき it indicates the non-completion of the action, and when the た-form of the predicate is put before とき it indicates the completion of the action.
In ⑧, かえる indicates that at the time being referred to the action had not been completed, that the speaker had not reached his/her country yet and that he/she bought a bag somewhere on his/her way there (Japan is included). In ⑨, かえった indicates that the action was completed and the speaker bought a bag after arriving in his/her country.
3. Vdictionary form と、～
..., then (inevitably)...
When expressing the situation where, as a result of a certain action, another action or matter inevitably happens, と is used to connect the sentences.
Expressions of one's will, hope, invitation or request cannot be used in the sentence which follows ～と.
In those cases, the conditional expression ～たら is used instead of ～と (see Lesson 25).
4. Nが adjective／V
You learned in Lesson 14 that the subject is indicated by が when describing a natural phenomenon. When describing a state or a scene as it is, the subject is also indicated by が.
5. N(place)を V(verb of movement)
The particle を is used to denote the place where a person or a thing passes. The verb of movement such as さんぽします, わたります, あるきます, etc. are used in this pattern.
Lesson 24
1. くれます
You learned that あげます means "give" in Lesson 7. This verb cannot be used when somebody else gives something to the speaker or the speaker's family, etc. (×さとうさんは わたしに クリスマスカードを あげました). In this case くれます is used.
2. Vて-form あげます／もらいます／くれます
あげます, もらいます and くれます are also used to refer to the giving and receiving of actions as well as those of things. They indicate who is doing that act for whom, while also expressing a sense of goodwill or gratitude. In this case, the act is expressed by the て-form.
1) Vて-form あげます
Vて-form あげます indicates that one does something for somebody with a sense of goodwill.
When the speaker is the actor and the listener is the receiver of the act, this expression could give the impression that the speaker is being patronizing. You are, therefore, advised to avoid using this expression directly to someone whom you do not know very well or who is senior or superior to you. You may use it to someone with whom you have a very close, friendly relationship. So, when you offer assistance to someone who is not very close, Vます-form ましょうか (see Lesson 14, 6) is used.
2) Vて-form もらいます
This expression conveys a sense of gratitude on the part of those who receive a favor.
3) Vて-form くれます
Like Vて-form もらいます, this expression also conveys a sense of gratitude on the part of those who receive a favor. The difference is that Vて-form もらいます has the receiver of the act as the subject of the sentence, while Vて-form くれます has the actor as the subject of the sentence, implying the actor (the subject) voluntarily takes the action. The receiver of the act in the latter case is often the speaker and わたし(the receiver)に is often omitted.
3. N(person)が V
You present a topic, saying すてきな ネクタイですね. Responding to it, your partner in conversation gives a piece of information on the topic which is unknown to you, [この ネクタイは] さとうさんが くれました. The subject of the sentence giving new information is indicated by が.
4. Interrogative が V
You learned that when the subject is questioned, it is indicated by が in あります／います sentences (Lesson 10) and adjective sentences (Lesson 12). This is also the case for verb sentences.
Lesson 25
1. plain past form ら、～
If...
When ら is attached to the past tense plain form of verbs, adjectives, etc., it changes the preceding clause into a conditional expression. When a speaker wants to state his opinion, situation, request, etc., in the conditional, this pattern is used.
2. Vた-form ら、～
When.../After...
This pattern is used to express that a certain action will be done or a certain situation will appear when a matter, action or state which is sure to happen in the future has been completed or achieved. The main sentence is always in the present tense.
3. Vて-form／い-adj(～い)→～くて／な-adj[な]→で／Nで も、～
Even if...
This expression is used to present a reverse condition. Contrary to plain past form ら、～, this expression is used when an action which is expected to be taken or an event which is expected to happen naturally under the given circumstances does not materialize or a thing turns out in a way opposite to a socially accepted idea.
4. もし and いくら
もし is used in a sentence in the plain past form to indicate beforehand that the sentence is going to present a condition, while いくら is used with ～ても(～でも) to do the same. もし implies that an emphasis is on the speaker's supposition while いくら is meant to stress the degree of conditionality.
5. Nが
As mentioned in Lesson 16, 4. [Note], the subject of a subordinate clause is indicated by が. In subordinate clauses using たら, ても, とき, と, まえに, etc., in addition to から, the subject is indicated by が, as shown below.
PART 2 — GRAMMAR QUESTIONS
This book (Translation & Grammatical Notes) contains no grammar questions, exercises or practice problems. The Practice and Drill sections are in the separate Main Text. What the book does contain are the question-and-answer example sentences inside each lesson's Grammar Explanation, which appear above under their lessons.

--- TABLES ---

Table 1
① わたしは マイク・ミラーです。 | I am Mike Miller.

Table 2
② わたしは エンジニアです。 | I am an engineer.

Table 3
③ サントスさんは 学生じゃ ありません。 | Mr. Santos is not a student.
(では) | 

Table 4
④ ミラーさんは アメリカ人ですか。 | Is Mr. Miller an American?
…はい、アメリカ人です。 | …Yes, he is.
⑤ ミラーさんは 先生ですか。 | Is Mr. Miller a teacher?
…いいえ、先生じゃ ありません。 | …No, he is not.

Table 5
⑥ あの 方は どなたですか。 | Who is that man?
…[あの 方は] ミラーさんです。 | …That's Mr. Miller.

Table 6
⑦ ミラーさんは 会社員です。 | Mr. Miller is a company employee.
グプタさんも 会社員です。 | Mr. Gupta is also a company employee.

Table 7
⑧ ミラーさんは IMCの 社員です。 | Mr. Miller is an IMC employee.

Table 8
⑨ あの 方は ミラーさんです。 | That's Mr. Miller.

Table 9
⑩ 鈴木： ミラーさんは 学生ですか。 | Suzuki: Are you a student?
ミラー： いいえ、会社員です。 | Miller: No, I'm a company employee.

Table 10
① それは 辞書ですか。 | Is that a dictionary?
② これを ください。 | I'll take this. (lit. Please give this to me.)(L. 3)

Table 11
③ この 本は わたしのです。 | This book is mine.
④ あの 方は どなたですか。 | Who is that [person]?

Table 12
⑤ それは テレホンカードですか。 | Is that a telephone card?
…はい、そうです。 | …Yes, it is. (lit. Yes, it's so.)
⑥ それは テレホンカードですか。 | Is that a telephone card?
…いいえ、そうじゃ ありません。 | …No, it isn't. (lit. No, it's not so.)

Table 13
⑦ それは テレホンカードですか。 | Is that a telephone card?
…いいえ、違います。 | …No, it isn't.

Table 14
⑧ これは 「9」ですか、「7」ですか。 | Is this a "9" or a "7"?
…「9」です。 | …It's a "9."

Table 15
⑨ これは コンピューターの 本です。 | This is a book on computers.

Table 16
⑩ これは わたしの 本です。 | This is my book.

Table 17
⑪ あれは だれの かばんですか。 | Whose bag is that?
…佐藤さんのです。 | …It's Ms. Sato's.
⑫ この かばんは あなたのですか。 | Is this bag yours?
…いいえ、わたしのじゃ ありません。 | …No, it's not mine.
⑬ ミラーさんは IMCの 社員ですか。 | Is Mr. Miller an employee of IMC?
…はい、IMCの 社員です。 | …Yes, he is.

Table 18
⑭ この 傘は あなたのですか。 | Is this umbrella yours?
…いいえ、違います。シュミットさんのです。 | …No, it's Mr. Schmidt's.
そうですか。 | I see.

Table 19
① お手洗いは あそこです。 | The rest room is there.
② 電話は 2階です。 | The telephone is on the second floor.
③ 山田さんは 事務所です。 | Mr. Yamada is in the office.

Table 20
④ お手洗いは どこですか。 | Where's the rest room?
…あそこです。 | …It's there.
⑤ エレベーターは どちらですか。 | Where's the elevator?
…あちらです。 | …It's in that direction. (It's there.)

Table 21
⑥ 学校は どこですか。 | What's the name of your school?
⑦ 会社は どちらですか。 | What company do you work for?

Table 22
⑧ これは どこの コンピューターですか。 | Where is this computer made?/ Who is the maker of this computer?
…日本の コンピューターです。 | …It's made in Japan.
…IMCの コンピューターです。 | …IMC is.

Table 23
 | こ series | そ series | あ series | ど series
thing | これ | それ | あれ | どれ (L. 8)
thing / person | この N | その N | あの N | どの N (L. 16)
place | ここ | そこ | あそこ | どこ
direction / place (polite) | こちら | そちら | あちら | どちら

Table 24
⑨ [お]国は どちらですか。 | Where are you from?

Table 25
① 今 何時ですか。 | What time is it now?
…7時10分です。 | …It's seven ten.

Table 26
② ニューヨークは 今 何時ですか。 | In New York what time is it now?
…午前 4時です。 | …It's 4 a.m.

Table 27
③ わたしは 毎日 勉強します。 | I study every day.

Table 28
 | non-past (future/present) | past
affirmative | (おき)ます | (おき)ました
negative | (おき)ません | (おき)ませんでした

Table 29
④ 毎朝 6時に 起きます。 | I get up at six every morning.
⑤ あした 6時に 起きます。 | I'll get up at six tomorrow morning.
⑥ けさ 6時に 起きました。 | I got up at six this morning.

Table 30
⑦ きのう 勉強しましたか。 | Did you study yesterday?
…はい、勉強しました。 | …Yes, I did.
…いいえ、勉強しませんでした。 | …No, I didn't.
⑧ 毎朝 何時に 起きますか。 | What time do you get up every morning?
…6時に 起きます。 | …I get up at six.

Table 31
⑨ 6時半に 起きます。 | I get up at six thirty.
⑩ 7月2日に 日本へ 来ました。 | I came to Japan on July 2nd. (L. 5)
⑪ 日曜日[に] 奈良へ 行きます。 | I'm going to Nara on Sunday. (L. 5)
⑫ きのう 勉強しました。 | I studied yesterday.

Table 32
⑬ 9時から 5時まで 働きます。 | I work from nine to five.
⑭ 大阪から 東京まで 3時間 かかります。 | It takes three hours from Osaka to Tokyo. (L. 11)

Table 33
⑮ 9時から 働きます。 | I work from nine.

Table 34
⑯ 銀行は 9時から 3時までです。 | The bank is open from nine to three.
⑰ 昼休みは 12時からです。 | Lunchtime starts at twelve.

Table 35
⑱ 銀行の 休みは 土曜日と 日曜日です。 | The bank is closed on Saturdays and Sundays.

Table 36
⑲ 毎日 10時ごろまで 勉強します。 | I study till about ten every day.
…大変ですね。 | …That must be hard.
⑳ 山田さんの 電話番号は 871の 6813です。 | Mr. Yamada's telephone number is 871-6813.
…871の 6813ですね。 | …871-6813, right?

Table 37
① 京都へ 行きます。 | I will go to Kyoto.
② 日本へ 来ました。 | I came to Japan.
③ うちへ 帰ります。 | I will go home.

Table 38
④ どこ[へ]も 行きません。 | I don't go anywhere.
⑤ 何も 食べません。 | I don't eat anything. (L. 6)
⑥ だれも いません。 | Nobody is there. (L. 10)

Table 39
⑦ 電車で 行きます。 | I'll go by train.
⑧ タクシーで 来ました。 | I came by taxi.

Table 40
⑨ 駅から 歩いて 帰りました。 | I walked home from the station.

Table 41
⑩ 家族と 日本へ 来ました。 | I came to Japan with my family.

Table 42
⑪ 一人で 東京へ 行きます。 | I'll go to Tokyo alone.

Table 43
⑫ いつ 日本へ 来ましたか。 | When did you come to Japan?
…3月25日に 来ました。 | …I came on March 25th.
⑬ いつ 広島へ 行きますか。 | When will you go to Hiroshima?
…来週 行きます。 | …I'll go there next week.

Table 44
⑭ この 電車は 甲子園へ 行きますか。 | Does this train go to Koshien?
…いいえ、行きません。次の 普通ですよ。 | …No, it doesn't. The next local train does.
⑮ 無理な ダイエットは 体に よくないですよ。 | Excessive dieting is bad for your health. (L. 19)

Table 45
① ジュースを 飲みます。 | I drink juice.

Table 46
サッカーを します | play football
トランプを します | play cards

Table 47
パーティーを します | give a party
会議を します | hold a meeting

Table 48
宿題を します | do homework
仕事を します | do one's work

Table 49
② 月曜日 何を しますか。 | What will you do on Monday?
…京都へ 行きます。 | …I'll go to Kyoto.
③ きのう 何を しましたか。 | What did you do yesterday?
…サッカーを しました。 | …I played football.

Table 50
④ 月曜日は 何を しますか。 | On Monday what will you do?
…京都へ 行きます。 | …I'll go to Kyoto.

Table 51
⑤ それは 何ですか。 | What is that?
⑥ 何の 本ですか。 | What is the book about?
⑦ 寝る まえに、何と 言いますか。 | What do you say before going to bed? (L. 21)

Table 52
⑧ テレサちゃんは 何歳ですか。 | How old is Teresa?

Table 53
⑨ 何を 買いますか。 | What will you buy?

Table 54
⑩ 駅で 新聞を 買います。 | I buy the newspaper at the station.

Table 55
⑪ いっしょに 京都へ 行きませんか。 | Won't you come to Kyoto with us?
…ええ、いいですね。 | …That's a nice idea.

Table 56
⑫ ちょっと 休みましょう。 | Let's have a break.
⑬ いっしょに 昼ごはんを 食べませんか。 | Won't you have lunch with me?
…ええ、食べましょう。 | …Yes, let's go and eat.

Table 57
① はしで 食べます。 | I eat with chopsticks.
② 日本語で レポートを 書きます。 | I write a report in Japanese.

Table 58
③ 「ありがとう」は 英語で 何ですか。 | What's "ありがとう" in English?
…「Thank you」です。 | … It's "Thank you."
④ 「Thank you」は 日本語で 何ですか。 | What's "Thank you" in Japanese?
…「ありがとう」です。 | … It's "ありがとう."

Table 59
⑤ 山田さんは 木村さんに 花を あげました。 | Mr. Yamada gave flowers to Ms. Kimura.
⑥ イーさんに 本を 貸しました。 | I lent my book to Ms. Lee.
⑦ 太郎君に 英語を 教えます。 | I teach Taro English.

Table 60
⑧ 会社に(へ) 電話を かけます。 | I'll call my office.

Table 61
⑨ 木村さんは 山田さんに 花を もらいました。 | Ms. Kimura received flowers from Mr. Yamada.
⑩ カリナさんに CDを 借りました。 | I borrowed a CD from Ms. Karina.
⑪ ワンさんに 中国語を 習います。 | I learn Chinese from Mr. Wang.

Table 62
⑫ 木村さんは 山田さんから 花を もらいました。 | Ms. Kimura received flowers from Mr. Yamada.
⑬ 銀行から お金を 借りました。 | I borrowed some money from the bank.

Table 63
⑭ もう 荷物を 送りましたか。 | Have you sent the parcel yet?
…はい、[もう] 送りました。 | …Yes, I have [already sent it].
…いいえ、まだです。 | …No, not yet.

Table 64
① ワット先生は 親切です。 | Mr. Watt is kind.
② 富士山は 高いです。 | Mt. Fuji is high.

Table 65
③ あそこは 静かじゃ ありません。 | It's not quiet there. (では)

Table 66
④ この 本は おもしろくないです。 | This book is not interesting.

Table 67
⑤ ペキンは 寒いですか。 | Is it cold in Beijing?
…はい、寒いです。 | …Yes, it is.
⑥ 琵琶湖の 水は きれいですか。 | Is the water of Lake Biwa clean?
…いいえ、きれいじゃ ありません。 | …No, it isn't.

Table 68
⑦ ワット先生は 親切な 先生です。 | Mr. Watt is a kind teacher.
⑧ 富士山は 高い 山です。 | Mt. Fuji is a high mountain.

Table 69
⑨ ペキンは とても 寒いです。 | Beijing is very cold.
⑩ これは とても 有名な 映画です。 | This is a very famous movie.
⑪ シャンハイは あまり 寒くないです。 | Shanghai is not very cold.
⑫ さくら大学は あまり 有名な 大学じゃ ありません。 | Sakura University is not a very famous university.

Table 70
⑬ 日本の 生活は どうですか。 | How is the life in Japan?
…楽しいです。 | …It's enjoyable.

Table 71
⑭ 奈良は どんな 町ですか。 | What kind of town is Nara?
…古い 町です。 | …It's an old town.

Table 72
⑮ 日本の 食べ物は おいしいですが、高いです。 | Japanese food is good, but expensive.

Table 73
⑯ ミラーさんの 傘は どれですか。 | Which is Mr. Miller's umbrella?
…あの 青い 傘です。 | …That blue one is.

Table 74
① わたしは イタリア料理が 好きです。 | I like Italian food.
② わたしは 日本語が わかります。 | I understand Japanese.
③ わたしは 車が あります。 | I have a car.

Table 75
④ どんな スポーツが 好きですか。 | What sports do you like?
…サッカーが 好きです。 | …I like football.

Table 76
degree | adverb + affirmative | adverb + negative
high ↑ | よく わかります | 
 | だいたい わかります | 
low ↓ | すこし わかります | あまり わかりません
 |  | ぜんぜん わかりません

Table 77
amount | adverb + affirmative | adverb + negative
large ↑ | たくさん あります | 
small ↓ | すこし あります | あまり ありません
 |  | ぜんぜん ありません

Table 78
⑤ 英語が よく わかります。 | I understand English very well.
⑥ 英語が 少し わかります。 | I understand English a little.
⑦ 英語が あまり わかりません。 | I don't understand English so well.
⑧ お金が たくさん あります。 | I have a lot of money.
⑨ お金が 全然 ありません。 | I don't have any money.

Table 79
⑩ ここは 少し 寒いです。 | It's a little cold here.
⑪ あの 映画は 全然 おもしろくないです。 | That movie is not interesting at all.

Table 80
⑫ 時間が ありませんから、新聞を 読みません。 | Because I don't have time, I don't read the newspaper.

Table 81
⑬ 毎朝 新聞を 読みますか。 | Do you read a newspaper every morning?
…いいえ、読みません。時間が ありませんから。 | …No, I don't. Because I have no time.

Table 82
⑭ どうして 朝 新聞を 読みませんか。 | Why don't you read a newspaper in the morning?
…時間が ありませんから。 | …Because I don't have time.

Table 83
⑮ きょうは 早く 帰ります。 | I'll go home early today.
…どうしてですか。 | …Why?
子どもの 誕生日ですから。 | Because today's my child's birthday.

Table 84
① コンピューターが あります。 | There is a computer.
② 桜が あります。 | There are cherry trees.
③ 公園が あります。 | There is a park.

Table 85
④ 男の 人が います。 | There is a man.
⑤ 犬が います。 | There is a dog.

Table 86
⑥ わたしの 部屋に 机が あります。 | There is a desk in my room.
⑦ 事務所に ミラーさんが います。 | Mr. Miller is in the office.

Table 87
⑧ 地下に 何が ありますか。 | What is in the basement?
…レストランが あります。 | …There are restaurants.
⑨ 受付に だれが いますか。 | Who is at the reception desk?
…木村さんが います。 | …Ms. Kimura is there.

Table 88
⑩ 東京ディズニーランドは 千葉県に あります。 | Tokyo Disneyland is in Chiba Prefecture.
⑪ ミラーさんは 事務所に います。 | Mr. Miller is in the office.

Table 89
⑫ 東京ディズニーランドは どこに ありますか。 | Where is Tokyo Disneyland?
…千葉県に あります。 | …It's in Chiba Prefecture.
⑬ ミラーさんは どこに いますか。 | Where is Mr. Miller?
…事務所に います。 | …He's in the office.

Table 90
⑭ 東京ディズニーランドは どこに ありますか。 | Where is Tokyo Disneyland?
…千葉県です。 | …It's in Chiba Prefecture.

Table 91
⑮ 机の 上に 写真が あります。 | There is a picture on the desk.
⑯ 郵便局は 銀行の 隣に あります。 | The post office is next to the bank.

Table 92
⑰ 駅の 近くで 友達に 会いました。 | I met a friend near the station.

Table 93
⑱ 箱の 中に 手紙や 写真が あります。 | There are letters, pictures and so on in the box.
⑲ 箱の 中に 手紙や 写真などが あります。 | There are letters, pictures and so on in the box.

Table 94
⑳ すみません。ユニューヤ・ストアは どこですか。 | Excuse me, but where is Yunyu-ya Store?
…ユニューヤ・ストアですか。あの ビルの 中です。 | …Yunyu-ya Store? It's in that building.

Table 95
－人 | number of people except for one and two. ひとり (1人) and ふたり (2人) are used for one and two. 4人 (four people) is read よにん.
－台 | number of machines or vehicles like cars and bicycles
－枚 | number of thin or flat things such as paper, dishes, shirts, CDs, etc.
－回 | times
－分 | minutes
－時間 | hours
－日 | days. The number of days takes the counter suffix にち. However, from two to ten, the same words as used for dates are used. ("One day" is いちにち, "two days" is ふつか, ……, "ten days" is とおか.)
－週間 | weeks
－か月 | months
－年 | years

Table 96
① りんごを 4つ 買いました。 | We bought four apples.
② 外国人の 学生が 2人 います。 | There are two foreign students.
③ 国で 2か月 日本語を 勉強しました。 | I studied Japanese for two months in my country.

Table 97
④ みかんを いくつ 買いましたか。 | How many mandarin oranges did you buy?
…8つ 買いました。 | …I bought eight.

Table 98
⑤ この 会社に 外国人が 何人 いますか。 | How many foreigners are there in this company?
…5人 います。 | …There are five.
⑥ 毎晩 何時間 日本語を 勉強しますか。 | How many hours do you study Japanese every night?
…2時間 勉強します。 | …Two hours.

Table 99
⑦ どのくらい 日本語を 勉強しましたか。 | How long did you study Japanese?
…3年 勉強しました。 | …I studied it for three years.
⑧ 大阪から 東京まで どのくらい かかりますか。 | How long does it take from Osaka to Tokyo?
…新幹線で 2時間半 かかります。 | …It takes two and a half hours by Shinkansen.

Table 100
⑨ 学校に 先生が 30人ぐらい います。 | There are about thirty teachers in our school.
⑩ 15分ぐらい かかります。 | It takes about fifteen minutes.

Table 101
⑪ 1か月に 2回 映画を 見ます。 | I go to see movies twice a month.

Table 102
⑫ パワー電気に 外国人の 社員が 1人だけ います。 | There is only one foreign employee in Power Electric.
⑬ 休みは 日曜日だけです。 | I only have Sundays off.

Table 103
 | non-past (present/future) | past
affirmative | N あめ / な-adj しずか + です | N あめ / な-adj しずか + でした
negative | N あめ / な-adj しずか + じゃ ありません (では) | N あめ / な-adj しずか + じゃ ありませんでした (では)

Table 104
① きのうは 雨でした。 | It was rainy yesterday.
② きのうの 試験は 簡単じゃ ありませんでした。 | Yesterday's exam was not easy.

Table 105
 | non-past (present/future) | past
affirmative | あついです | あつかったです
negative | あつくないです | あつくなかったです

Table 106
③ きのうは 暑かったです。 | It was hot yesterday.
④ きのうの パーティーは あまり 楽しくなかったです。 | I didn't enjoy yesterday's party very much.

Table 107
⑤ この 車は あの 車より 大きいです。 | This car is bigger than that car.

Table 108
⑥ サッカーと 野球と どちらが おもしろいですか。 | Which is more interesting, baseball or football?
…サッカーの ほうが おもしろいです。 | …Football is.
⑦ ミラーさんと サントスさんと どちらが テニスが 上手ですか。 | Who is a better tennis player, Mr. Miller or Mr. Santos?
⑧ 北海道と 大阪と どちらが 涼しいですか。 | Which is cooler, Hokkaido or Osaka?
⑨ 春と 秋と どちらが 好きですか。 | Which do you like better, spring or autumn?

Table 109
⑩ 日本料理[の 中]で 何が いちばん おいしいですか。 | Among Japanese dishes, what is the most delicious?
…てんぷらが いちばん おいしいです。 | …Tempura is.
⑪ ヨーロッパで どこが いちばん よかったですか。 | In Europe, where did you like best?
…スイスが いちばん よかったです。 | …I liked Switzerland best.
⑫ 家族で だれが いちばん 背が 高いですか。 | Who is the tallest of your family?
…弟が いちばん 背が 高いです。 | …My younger brother is.
⑬ 1年で いつが いちばん 寒いですか。 | When is the coldest time of a year?
…2月が いちばん 寒いです。 | …It's coldest in February.

Table 110
① わたしは 友達が 欲しいです。 | I want a friend.
② 今 何が いちばん 欲しいですか。 | What do you want most now?
…車が 欲しいです。 | …I want a car most.
③ 子どもが 欲しいですか。 | Do you want a child?
…いいえ、欲しくないです。 | …No, I don't.

Table 111
④ わたしは 沖縄へ 行きたいです。 | I want to go to Okinawa.
⑤ わたしは てんぷらを(が) 食べたいです。 | I want to eat tempura.
⑥ 神戸で 何を(が) 買いたいですか。 | What do you want to buy in Kobe?
…靴を(が) 買いたいです。 | …I want to buy a pair of shoes.
⑦ おなかが 痛いですから、何も 食べたくないです。 | Because I have a stomachache, I don't want to eat anything.

Table 112
⑧ 神戸へ インド料理を 食べに 行きます。 | I'm going to Kobe to eat Indian food.
⑨ 神戸へ 買い物に 行きます。 | I'm going to Kobe for shopping.
⑩ 日本へ 美術の 勉強に 来ました。 | I came to Japan in order to study art.

Table 113
⑪ あした 京都の お祭りに 行きます。 | I'll go to the festival in Kyoto tomorrow.

Table 114
⑫ あの 喫茶店に 入りましょう。 | Let's go in that coffee shop.
⑬ 7時に うちを 出ます。 | I leave my house at 7 o'clock.

Table 115
⑭ 冬休みは どこか[へ] 行きましたか。 | Did you go anywhere in the winter vacation?
…はい、行きました。 | …Yes, I did.
⑮ のどが かわきましたから、何か[を] 飲みたいです。 | I'm thirsty. I want to drink something.

Table 116
⑯ ご注文は？ | May I have your order?

Table 117
かきます | write
のみます | drink

Table 118
たべます | eat
みせます | show
みます | see

Table 119
① すみませんが、この 漢字の 読み方を 教えて ください。 | Excuse me, could you tell me how to read this kanji, please?
② ここに 住所と 名前を 書いて ください。 | Please write your name and address here.
③ ぜひ 遊びに 来て ください。 | Please come to my place. (L. 25)

Table 120
④ ミラーさんは 今 電話を かけて います。 | Mr. Miller is making a phone call now.
⑤ 今 雨が 降って いますか。 | Is it raining now?
…はい、降って います。 | …Yes, it is.
…いいえ、降って いません。 | …No, it is not.

Table 121
⑥ A：あしたも 来ましょうか。 | Shall I come tomorrow, too?
B：ええ、10時に 来て ください。 | …Yes, please come at ten.
⑦ A：傘を 貸しましょうか。 | Shall I lend you an umbrella?
B：すみません。お願いします。 | …Yes, please.
⑧ A：荷物を 持ちましょうか。 | Shall I carry your parcel?
B：いいえ、けっこうです。 | …No, thank you.

Table 122
⑨ 失礼ですが、お名前は？ | Excuse me, but may I have your name? (L. 1)
⑩ すみませんが、塩を 取って ください。 | Please pass me the salt.

Table 123
⑪ 雨が 降って います。 | It is raining.

Table 124
① 写真を 撮っても いいです。 | You may take pictures.

Table 125
② たばこを 吸っても いいですか。 | May I smoke?

Table 126
③ この カタログを もらっても いいですか。 | May I have this catalogue?
…ええ、いいですよ。どうぞ。 | …Yes. Here you are.
…すみません。ちょっと。 | …Sorry. I'm afraid not.

Table 127
④ ここで たばこを 吸っては いけません。禁煙ですから。 | You must not smoke here. Because this is no-smoking area.

Table 128
⑤ 先生、ここで 遊んでも いいですか。 | May we play here, Ma'am?
…いいえ、いけません。 | …No, you must not.

Table 129
⑥ わたしは 結婚して います。 | I'm married.
⑦ わたしは 田中さんを 知って います。 | I know Mr. Tanaka.
⑧ わたしは 大阪に 住んで います。 | I live in Osaka.
⑨ わたしは カメラを 持って います。 | I have a camera.

Table 130
⑩ IMCは コンピューターソフトを 作って います。 | IMC makes computer software.
⑪ スーパーで フィルムを 売って います。 | Supermarkets sell films.
⑫ ミラーさんは IMCで 働いて います。 | Mr. Miller works for IMC.
⑬ 妹は 大学で 勉強して います。 | My younger sister is studying at university.

Table 131
⑭ 市役所の 電話番号を 知って いますか。 | Do you know the telephone number of the city hall?
…はい、知って います。 | …Yes, I do.
…いいえ、知りません。 | …No, I don't.

Table 132
① 朝 ジョギングを して、シャワーを 浴びて、会社へ 行きます。 | In the morning, I jog, take a shower and go to the office.
② 神戸へ 行って、映画を 見て、お茶を 飲みました。 | I went to Kobe, saw a movie and drank tea.

Table 133
おおきーい → おおきーくて | big
ちいさーい → ちいさーくて | small
いーい → ＊よーくて (exception) | good
③ ミラーさんは 若くて、元気です。 | Mr. Miller is young and lively.
④ きのうは 天気が よくて、暑かったです。 | Yesterday it was fine and hot.

Table 134
⑤ カリナさんは インドネシア人で、京都大学の 留学生です。 | Ms. Karina is an Indonesian and a student of Kyoto University.
⑥ ミラーさんは ハンサムで、親切です。 | Mr. Miller is handsome and kind.
⑦ 奈良は 静かで、きれいな 町です。 | Nara is a quiet and beautiful city.

Table 135
⑧ カリナさんは 学生で、マリアさんは 主婦です。 | Ms. Karina is a student and Maria is a housewife.

Table 136
× この 部屋は 狭くて、きれいです。 | 
○ この 部屋は 狭いですが、きれいです。 | This room is small but clean.

Table 137
⑨ 国へ 帰ってから、父の 会社で 働きます。 | I will work for my father's company after going back to my country.
⑩ コンサートが 終わってから、レストランで 食事しました。 | We ate at a restaurant after the concert was over.

Table 138
⑪ 大阪は 食べ物が おいしいです。 | Food is tasty in Osaka.
⑫ ドイツの フランケンは ワインが 有名です。 | Franken in Germany produces famous wine.
⑬ マリアさんは 髪が 長いです。 | Maria has long hair.

Table 139
⑭ 大学まで どうやって 行きますか。 | How do you go to your university?
…京都駅から 16番の バスに 乗って、大学前で 降ります。 | …I take a No.16 bus from Kyoto Station and get off at Daigaku-mae.

Table 140
⑮ サントスさんは どの 人ですか。 | Which one is Mr. Santos?
…あの 背が 高くて、髪が 黒い 人です。 | …That tall man with black hair is.

Table 141
かきます → かかない | 
いそぎます → いそがない | 
よみます → よまない | 
あそびます → あそばない | 
とります → とらない | 
まちます → またない | 
すいます → すわない | 
はなします → はなさない | 

Table 142
たべます → たべない | 
みます → みない | 

Table 143
べんきょうします → べんきょうしない | 
します → しない | 
きます → こない | 

Table 144
① わたしは 元気ですから、心配しないで ください。 | I am fine, so please don't worry about me.
② ここで 写真を 撮らないで ください。 | Please don't take pictures here.

Table 145
③ 薬を 飲まなければ なりません。 | I must take medicine.

Table 146
④ あした 来なくても いいです。 | You don't have to come tomorrow.

Table 147
ここに 荷物を 置かないで ください。 | Please don't put parcels here.
⑤ 荷物は ここに 置かないで ください。 | As for parcels, don't put them here.
会社の 食堂で 昼ごはんを 食べます。 | I have lunch in the company cafeteria.
⑥ 昼ごはんは 会社の 食堂で 食べます。 | As for lunch, I have it in the company cafeteria.

Table 148
⑦ 会議は 5時までに 終わります。 | The meeting will be over by five.
⑧ 土曜日までに 本を 返さなければ なりません。 | I must return the book by Saturday.

Table 149
5時まで 働きます。 | I work until five. (L. 4)

Table 150
① ミラーさんは 日本語が できます。 | Mr. Miller can speak Japanese.
② 雪が たくさん 降りましたから、ことしは スキーが できます。 | It's snowed a lot, so we can ski this year.

Table 151
③ ミラーさんは 漢字を 読む ことが できます。 (nominalized phrase: 漢字を 読む こと) | Mr. Miller can read Kanji.
④ カードで 払う ことが できます。 (nominalized phrase: カードで 払う こと) | You can pay by credit card.

Table 152
⑤ わたしの 趣味は 音楽です。 | My hobby is music.
⑥ わたしの 趣味は 音楽を 聞く ことです。 | My hobby is listening to the music.

Table 153
⑦ 日本へ 来る まえに、日本語を 勉強しました。 | I studied Japanese before I came to Japan.
⑧ 寝る まえに、本を 読みます。 | I read a book before I go to bed.

Table 154
⑨ 食事の まえに、手を 洗います。 | I wash my hands before eating.

Table 155
⑩ 田中さんは 1時間まえに、出かけました。 | Mr. Tanaka left an hour ago.

Table 156
⑪ 日本では なかなか 馬を 見る ことが できません。 | In Japan we can rarely see horses.

Table 157
⑫ ぜひ 北海道へ 行きたいです。 | I want to go to Hokkaido very much.
⑬ ぜひ 遊びに 来て ください。 | Please come to my place. (L. 25)

Table 158
 | て-form | → | た-form
Group I | かいて | → | かいた
Group I | のんで | → | のんだ
Group II | たべて | → | たべた
Group III | きて | → | きた
Group III | して | → | した

Table 159
① 馬に 乗った ことが あります。 | I have ridden a horse.

Table 160
② 去年 北海道で 馬に 乗りました。 | I rode a horse in Hokkaido last year.

Table 161
③ 日曜日は テニスを したり、映画を 見たり します。 | On Sundays I play tennis, see a movie and so on.
④ 日曜日は テニスを したり、映画を 見たり しました。 | Last Sunday I played tennis, saw a movie and so on.

Table 162
⑤ 日曜日は テニスを して、映画を 見ました。 | Last Sunday I played tennis and then saw a movie.

Table 163
⑥ 寒い → 寒く なります | get cold
⑦ 元気[な] → 元気に なります | get well
⑧ 25歳 → 25歳に なります | become 25 years old

Table 164
⑨ 寒く なりましたね。 | It's got cold, hasn't it?
…そうですね。 | …Yes, it has.

Table 165
polite style | plain style
あした 東京へ 行きます。 (I will go to Tokyo tomorrow.) | あした 東京へ 行く。 (I will go to Tokyo tomorrow.)
毎日 忙しいです。 (I am busy every day.) | 毎日 忙しい。 (I am busy every day.)
相撲が 好きです。 (I like sumo.) | 相撲が 好きだ。 (I like sumo.)
富士山に 登りたいです。 (I want to climb Mt. Fuji.) | 富士山に 登りたい。 (I want to climb Mt. Fuji.)
ドイツへ 行った ことが ありません。 (I have never been to Germany.) | ドイツへ 行った ことが ない。 (I have never been to Germany.)

Table 166
① コーヒーを 飲む？(↗) | Do you want a coffee?
…うん、飲む。(↘) | …Yes, I do.

Table 167
② 今晩 暇？ | Are you free tonight?
…うん、暇／暇だ／暇だよ。 | …Yes, I am. (used by men)
…うん、暇／暇よ。 | …Yes, I am. (used by women)
…ううん、暇じゃ ない。 | …No, I am not. (used by both men and women)

Table 168
③ ごはん[を] 食べる？ | Will you take a meal?
④ あした 京都[へ] 行かない？ | Won't you come to Kyoto tomorrow with me?
⑤ この りんご[は] おいしいね。 | This apple is tasty, isn't it?
⑥ そこに はさみ[が] ある？ | Is there a pair of scissors there?

Table 169
⑦ 辞書、持って[い]る？ | Do you have a dictionary?
…うん、持って[い]る。 | … Yes, I do.
…ううん、持って[い]ない。 | … No, I don't.

Table 170
⑧ その カレーライス[は] おいしい？ | Is that curry and rice tasty?
…うん、辛いけど、おいしい。 | …Yes, it's hot but tasty.
⑨ 相撲の チケット[が] あるけど いっしょに 行かない？ | I have tickets for sumo. Won't you come with me.
…いいね。 | …Sure.

Table 171
① あした 雨が 降ると 思います。 | I think it will rain tomorrow.
② テレサちゃんは もう 寝たと 思います。 | I think Teresa has already gone to bed.

Table 172
③ ミラーさんは この ニュースを 知って いますか。 | Does Mr. Miller know this news?
…いいえ、たぶん 知らないと 思います。 | …No, I don't think he does.

Table 173
④ 日本は 物価が 高いと 思います。 | I think that prices are high in Japan.

Table 174
⑤ 新しい 空港に ついて どう 思いますか。 | What do you think of the new airport?
…きれいですが、ちょっと 交通が 不便だと 思います。 | …I think that it is clean but the access to it is not easy.

Table 175
⑥ A：ファクスは 便利ですね。 | A: Fax machines are convenient, aren't they?
B：わたしも そう 思います。 | B: I think so, too.
C：わたしは そう[は] 思いません。 | C: I don't think so.

Table 176
⑦ 寝る まえに 「お休みなさい」と 言います。 | We say "Good night" before going to bed.
⑧ ミラーさんは 「来週 東京へ 出張します」と 言いました。 | Mr. Miller said "I will go to Tokyo on a business trip next week."

Table 177
⑨ ミラーさんは 来週 東京へ 出張すると 言いました。 | Mr. Miller said that he would go to Tokyo on a business trip next week.

Table 178
⑩ あした パーティーに 行くでしょう？ | You are going to the party tomorrow, aren't you?
…ええ、行きます。 | …Yes, I am.
⑪ 北海道は 寒かったでしょう？ | It was cold in Hokkaido, wasn't it?
…いいえ、そんなに 寒くなかったです。 | …No, it wasn't that cold.

Table 179
⑫ 東京で 日本と ブラジルの サッカーの 試合が あります。 | A football game between Japan and Brazil will be held in Tokyo.

Table 180
⑬ 会議で 何か 意見を 言いましたか。 | Did you give your opinion at the meeting?

Table 181
⑭ ちょっと ビールでも 飲みませんか。 | Shall we drink beer or something?

Table 182
⑮ もう 帰らないと……。 | I have to go home now.

Table 183
ミラーさんの うち | Mr. Miller's house (L. 2)
新しい うち | a new house (L. 8)
きれいな うち | a beautiful house (L. 8)

Table 184
① 京都へ 行く 人 | a person who goes to Kyoto
京都へ 行かない 人 | a person who does not go to Kyoto
京都へ 行った 人 | a person who went to Kyoto
京都へ 行かなかった 人 | a person who did not go to Kyoto
背が 高くて、髪が 黒い 人 | a person who is tall and has black hair
親切で、きれいな 人 | a person who is kind and pretty
65歳の 人 | a person who is 65 years old

Table 185
② わたしは 先週 映画を 見ました → わたしが 先週 見た 映画 | I saw a movie last week → the movie that I saw last week
③ ワンさんは 病院で 働いて います → ワンさんが 働いている 病院 | Mr. Wang works at a hospital → the hospital where Mr. Wang works
④ わたしは あした 友達に 会います → わたしが あした 会う 友達 | I will meet a friend tomorrow → the friend whom I will meet tomorrow

Table 186
⑤ これは ミラーさんが 住んで いた うちです。 | This is the house where Mr. Miller lived.
⑥ ミラーさんが 住んで いた うちは 古いです。 | The house where Mr. Miller lived is old.
⑦ ミラーさんが 住んで いた うちを 買いました。 | I bought the house where Mr. Miller lived.
⑧ わたしは ミラーさんが 住んで いた うちが 好きです。 | I like the house where Mr. Miller lived.
⑨ ミラーさんが 住んで いた うちに 猫が いました。 | There was a cat in the house where Mr. Miller lived.
⑩ ミラーさんが 住んで いた うちへ 行った ことが あります。 | I have been to the house where Mr. Miller lived.

Table 187
ミラーさんは ケーキを 作りました。 | Mr. Miller baked a cake.
⑪ これは ミラーさんが 作った ケーキです。 | This is the cake which Mr. Miller baked.
⑫ わたしは カリナさんが かいた 絵が 好きです。 | I like the picture that Ms. Karina drew.
⑬ [あなたは] 彼が 生まれた 所を 知って いますか。 | Do you know the place where he was born?

Table 188
⑭ わたしは 朝ごはんを 食べる 時間が ありません。 | I have no time to eat breakfast.

Table 189
⑮ わたしは 友達と 映画を 見る 約束が あります。 | I have an arrangement to see a movie with a friend of mine.
⑯ きょうは 市役所へ 行く 用事が あります。 | I have something to do at the city hall today.

Table 190
① 図書館で 本を 借りる とき、カードが 要ります。 | When you borrow books from the library, you need a card.
② 使い方が わからない とき、わたしに 聞いて ください。 | When you don't know how to use it, ask me.
③ 体の 調子が 悪い とき、「元気茶」を 飲みます。 | When I'm not in good shape, I drink "Genki-cha."
④ 暇な とき、うちへ 遊びに 来ませんか。 | Won't you come to my place when you are free?
⑤ 妻が 病気の とき、会社を 休みます。 | When my wife is sick, I take a day off work.
⑥ 若い とき、あまり 勉強しませんでした。 | When I was young, I did not study much.
⑦ 子どもの とき、よく 川で 泳ぎました。 | I used to swim in a river when I was a child.

Table 191
⑧ 国へ 帰る とき、かばんを 買いました。 | I bought a bag when I went back to my country.
⑨ 国へ 帰った とき、かばんを 買いました。 | I bought a bag when I went back to my country.

Table 192
⑩ この ボタンを 押すと、お釣りが 出ます。 | Press this button, and the change will come out.
⑪ これを 回すと、音が 大きく なります。 | Turn this, and the volume will go up.
⑫ 右へ 曲がると、郵便局が あります。 | Turn to the right, and you will find the post office.

Table 193
× 時間が あると、映画を 見に 行きます。 (will) | 
× 時間が あると、映画を 見に 行きたいです。 (hope) | 
× 時間が あると、映画を 見に 行きませんか。 (invitation) | 
× 時間が あると、ちょっと 手伝って ください。 (request) | 

Table 194
⑬ 音が 小さいです。 | The volume is low.
⑭ 電気が 明るく なりました。 | The light became brighter.
⑮ この ボタンを 押すと、切符が 出ます。 | Press this button, and a ticket will come out.

Table 195
⑯ 公園を 散歩します。 | I take a walk in the park. (L. 13)
⑰ 道を 渡ります。 | I cross the road.
⑱ 交差点を 右へ 曲がります。 | I turn to the right at the intersection.

Table 196
① わたしは 佐藤さんに 花を あげました。 | I gave flowers to Ms. Sato.
② 佐藤さんは わたしに クリスマスカードを くれました。 | Ms. Sato gave me a Christmas card.
③ 佐藤さんは 妹に お菓子を くれました。 | Ms. Sato gave candies to my younger sister.

Table 197
④ わたしは 木村さんに 本を 貸して あげました。 | I lent Ms. Kimura a book.

Table 198
⑤ タクシーを 呼びましょうか。 | Shall I call a taxi for you? (L. 14)
⑥ 手伝いましょうか。 | May I help you? (L. 14)

Table 199
⑦ わたしは 山田さんに 図書館の 電話番号を 教えて もらいました。 | Mr. Yamada told me the telephone number of the library.

Table 200
⑧ 母は [わたしに] セーターを 送って くれました。 | My mother sent me a sweater.

Table 201
⑨ すてきな ネクタイですね。 | That's a nice tie, isn't it?
…ええ、佐藤さんが くれました。 | …Yes. Ms. Sato gave it to me.

Table 202
⑩ だれが 手伝いに 行きますか。 | Who will go to give him a hand?
…カリナさんが 行きます。 | …Ms. Karina will.

Table 203
① お金が あったら、旅行します。 | If I had money, I would travel.
② 時間が なかったら、テレビを 見ません。 | If I don't have time, I will not watch TV.
③ 安かったら、パソコンを 買いたいです。 | If it's inexpensive, I want to buy a personal computer.
④ 暇だったら、手伝って ください。 | If you are free, please give me a hand.
⑤ いい 天気だったら、散歩しませんか。 | If it's fine, won't you take a walk with me?

Table 204
⑥ 10時に なったら、出かけましょう。 | Let's go out when it gets to ten.
⑦ うちへ 帰ったら、すぐ シャワーを 浴びます。 | I take a shower soon after I return home.

Table 205
⑧ 雨が 降っても、洗濯します。 | Even if it rains, I'll do the laundry.
⑨ 安くても、わたしは グループ旅行が 嫌いです。 | Even if group tours are inexpensive, I don't like them.
⑩ 便利でも、パソコンを 使いません。 | Even if a personal computer is useful, I won't use it.
⑪ 日曜日でも、働きます。 | Even if it is Sunday, I will work.

Table 206
⑫ もし 1億円 あったら、いろいろな 国を 旅行したいです。 | If I had 100 million yen, I would want to travel in various countries.
⑬ いくら 考えても、わかりません。 | No matter how much I think, I can't understand this.
⑭ いくら 高くても、買います。 | No matter how expensive it is, I will buy it.

Table 207
⑮ 友達が 来る まえに、部屋を 掃除します。 | I will clean my room before my friends come. (L. 18)
⑯ 妻が 病気の とき、会社を 休みます。 | When my wife is sick, I take a day off work. (L. 23)
⑰ 友達が 約束の 時間に 来なかったら、どう しますか。 | If your friend doesn't come on time, what will you do? (L. 25)
